tonight I'm excited to welcome Dr sadara
muker to Harvard bookstore to discuss
his book The Emperor of all maladies uh
Dr mookery is a cancer physician and
researcher at Columbia University
Medical Center uh as well as a professor
of medicine at Columbia a road scholar
Dr muckery graduated from Stanford
Oxford and Harvard Medical School his
writing has appeared in nature the New
England Journal of Medicine the New York
Times and the new Republic uh the
Emperor of all maladies is his first
book uh Dr Muki subtitled his book a
biography of cancer and he provides the
reader the story of the disease from its
earliest recorded history in ancient
Egypt up through the modern era in the
thousands of years that humankind has
been aware of the disease attitudes
about cancer and approaches to its
treatment have changed greatly uh the
prominence cancer holds in modern
culture would have been unimaginable
only a hundred years ago when the
disease was considered shameful Dr
muckery also writes about his own
experience treating cancer uh providing
a unique insight into the ongoing fight
against what he terms our desperate
malevolent contemporary doppelganger uh
Publishers Weekly called the book A
sweeping epic of obsession brilliant
researches dramatic new treatments
euphoric success and tragic failure it's
time to welcome a new star into the
constellation of great doctor writers
wrote The Washington Post going on to
call the Emperor of all maladies
enthralling juicy scholarly and
wonderfully written and uh just today
the New York Times named the Emperor of
all maladies one of the 10 best books of
the year so that's very exciting
[Applause]
thank you so much for that lovely
introduction uh my introduction began at
5: in the morning when I got this phone
call about the New York Times so a
little bit groggy um but it was
wonderful um this bookstore holds us
very special place in my heart um
because much of this book was actually
written it just across from here um at
Lamont uh library that was my chosen
space of work um I used to sit in the
windows and every evening that I would
right uh or finish any work I would
usually take a winding road back to my
house which usually almost always
involved a stop here and and a slight
unloading of my wallet um and and I was
this and this have I was in C I was
lived in Cambridge for 13 years and in I
would say in a one mile vicinity of of
Harvard bookstore and I think some of
that was conscious uh because I really
am attached to this particular bookstore
but to bookstores in general and I'm
very happy to support it in any manner
or form
um for tonight I thought I would do a
couple of things um one is that um i'
I'd like to talk more about the book
than read from it uh partly because
that's a that's an experience that you
can't get uh from reading the book um
and so I'll I'll do a couple of small
readings from the book but really I want
to talk about how the book was written
and why it was written and sort of what
the what the overall Global story is um
and I hope I I'm obviously not going to
give away any piece of it but I hope to
convey the sense of what what the book
is um and I to start I think um one
thing that struck me very early on Nan
Graham who was my editor in writing this
book said to me that um in the end the
entire paraphernalia of the book world
including bookstores and uh editors and
Publishers and designers etc etc are
merely tools to get one author sitting
alone in a room to communicate with one
reader sitting alone in a room and if
you forget that for a second you are
unable to write a book and that struck
me as very important because in some
sense that is also the practice of
medicine in the end if you take the
entire paraphernalia of a million dooll
hospital and it's CAT scans and MRIs and
thousands of dollars of Technology
poured in every second in the end the
practice of medicine occurs between one
person sitting in a room and another
person sitting hopefully in the same
room but nonetheless um and I think
there's an important parallel there and
that parallel uh is really what
motivates this kind of book and that
parallel is storytelling um that
parallel is that much like the much like
writing a book is a communication
between as I said one person and another
person through the version through a
story medicine at its best um is begins
with storytelling um and and if you
cannot tell a story L the practice of
medicine breaks down um and so uh in a
very very fundamental sense right at the
beginning of of writing this book I
acknowledge that but also right in the
beginning of of writing this book I felt
that this should be a story um and if
one could not construct a story of what
has happened in our lives against cancer
um for for you know the last 4,000 years
then there was something wrong because
this this had to be a story there could
not this could be nothing but a story
because of course this is a story of
many characters across many across a
vast amount of time but nonetheless it's
its narrative quality was very crucial
um and
so I started one of the one of the very
early devices that was used in this book
is to find the stories of patients um
whenever the whenever I felt the pulse
of the book drop um at any point of time
the answer was always
um find the stories find the story of
the patient forget for a moment about
the advancement forget for a moment
about the science um because that comes
secondary that's a secondary achievement
and and what is really really Central to
all of this is of course the story so
I'm going to begin uh with I'm going to
tell you some of these stories I can't
tell you all of them the book follows um
as as as chip MRA pointed out in the
times the book doesn't follow a linear
structure um it will bounce back it will
move between characters and and times
moving back sometimes 4,000 years
switching back forward 4,000 years but
the reason it's all connected of course
is that um medicine and science is also
having a conversation with its past so
every time you perform I mean I say I
say at one point of the time in the book
I say science scientists are actually
more obsessed with history than perhaps
even historians because there is no
discipline that I can think of which is
so deeply dependent on History we always
think of science as a futuristic
discipline but really it isn't it is a
discipline obsessed with immersed in its
past and it has to be because you're
conversing always back you're conversing
when I perform an experiment today I'm
actually conversing back to someone who
did it five years ago and that person
was actually conversing back to Galileo
or you know whoever else was sitting in
some other point of time writing trying
to explain or trying to create a Journey
Through Time and so so so again much
like that first analogy that I gave you
between patients between patient and a
doctor and a and a writer and as a
Storyteller there's also of course a
storytelling element in science except
now in science story it occurs to its
past it tells a story not to a person in
the physical present but a person in
this phys in the in the in the temporal
past and that was also a very important
piece of the book so the first story I
thought I would tell you is um very
early on one of the characters in the
book and I won't follow the the the L
narrative but one of the characters in
the book um one of the central
characters in the book is Sydney Farber
um and early on I had to make a decision
to have a single narrator a skeleton on
whom a 4,000 year old history could be
hung um and that's obviously a difficult
question how do you hang such an
enormous history on a single person or a
single uh single story and one thing
that was particularly important about
Sydney Farber and and it's the following
um Sydney Farber was a pathologist he
was born in 193
um he was called a doctor of the dead
because Pathologists usually perform
autopsies uh they usually don't treat
they usually diagnose and they're part
of the Great ancillary Services the kind
of invisible medicine that sits in every
hospital and far was very prominent
pathologist he he was a children's
pathologist and he um became very
interested in a disease called acute
lymphoblastic leukemia it's a children's
disease it's a form of leukemia a very
aggressive form of leukemia for the
following reason um in a world before
CAT scans and MRIs uh quantifying the
size of an internal tumor was impossible
nearly impossible but leukemia could be
measured because a tumor of the blood
and you could draw out a droplet of
blood you could look under a microscope
and say well there are more cells or
less cells and and science always begins
with measurement as soon as you perform
a measuring activity of any kind that is
already a scientific activity and so
Farber knew this he had inherited this
idea from his predecessors others knew
it too so he knew that if if there was
if something was to be done around
cancer he might might as well start with
its most one of its most measurable
forms and therefore he gravitated
towards acute lymphoblastic leukemia the
other reason was of course that this was
a this was a surgically un disease that
was surgically unamenable surgeons
couldn't operate on blood you can't take
blood out obviously um so there was no
it was it was as the book points out the
the the leukemia itself was like a
pariah between disciplines the
hematologist
the doctors of the blood uh passed it on
to the oncologist and the oncologist
passed it back to the hematologists and
and and the children were sort of stuck
in this in in in this in this between in
between space and so it was that that
was another Advantage it was a disease
that had nothing you know it was sort of
a pariah between disciplines actually
not unlike Farber himself he was also
moving between pathology and medicine
all the time and so um Sydney Farber had
a very key Insight um and that is that
he imagined that there were chemicals in
the world that could turn off or
selectively kill cancer cells while
sparing normal cells um this was a very
important Insight the so-called
penicillin for cancer this was a time
when America was just emerging out of
this is 1947 1948 just emerging out of
the sort of the late tale of the war um
and and it was a moment um actually very
important in the history of cancer
because cancer is a silent disease it's
an invisible disease these um there's an
important anecdote in the book um when
Fanny Rosenau a breast cancer Advocate
calls up the New York Times and she says
um I'm a breast cancer survivor I would
like to have a a group of people who um
meet a meeting group of of breast cancer
survivors and there's a long hold and
the times editor puts her on hold and
then the society editor comes on the
phone and she's Fanny Rosena is puzzled
and the society editor says well M Rosen
now you know we can't print the word
breast cancer in the times what if we
said that this was a meeting of women
with diseases of the chest wall um so
this is this is this is 1950 uh this is
the atmosphere that Farber is working in
he's looking for a u he's looking for a
chemical that will turn on or turn on or
turn off these malignant cells and he
finds an important Ally um and that Ally
is a man named yell subar um uh kind of
interestingly forgotten in medical
history and an Indian Doctor Who had
come to Boston um he had actually
applied for um he had applied for a
fellowship in the school of tropical
health and Medicine um and not realizing
that actually Boston was far from
tropical um and and so and this is true
he came from Madras he came from on a
boat um landed up here in the middle of
the winter uh almost really froze to
death his first winter uh he lived in a
in a in a kind of Garrett uh underneath
a a house in in Brooklyn I've been to
his Brookline I've been to his uh his
apartment um and U yela subar uh was
denied tenure at Harvard um uh and then
went off to a pharmaceutical company up
north in New York and was synthesizing
these chemicals which turned out to be
the precisely the chemicals that Farber
was looking for so these were chemicals
called antifolates Farber had figured
out that folic acid was one of the
chemicals that the blood that leukemia
cells required for their growth so
leukemia cells were very dependent on
the growth of folic acid um and and
therefore an antifolate an antagonist to
folic acid would would perhaps act as a
chemotherapeutic drug and he then
contacted yela who was up north actually
Farber was one of y's few friends while
he was in in in Boston he contacted
yella and yella sent him the first vials
of this new drug this antifolate folate
called aminopterin and Farber without
actually really knowing very much just
rolled up his sleeves and he began to
inject these these tremendously ill kids
with these antifolates um and he saw
these brief tantalizing remissions these
kids who were these children two or
three years old by the way this is the
time when I had my my daughter was three
um so a very emotional connection to all
of this and I I I had been in the wards
and seen three-year-old children with
lymphoblastic leukemia and they at uh
now as as I'll tell you later I'm going
to I'm I'm going to split the suspense a
second this is a curable disease this is
a 80 this is a disease that carries an
80 or 90% cure rate um but it was 100%
lethal in farber's time and he began to
inject these children with antifolates
and he saw these tantilizing remissions
uh the kids would go and have a
remission 5 months 6 months 12 months
and then they would relapse and die
again um and so so here comes a little
personal story which is not in the book
um which is that now this I knew I had
constructed these pieces of history from
talking to farber's family from picking
up records there's a trail of paper
trail but now who was the first child to
be treated and where would this did this
child exist um so in the papers farb
refers to this child as a child called
RS and then my quest became find RS um
because I I felt as if um I couldn't
write this book if I couldn't find RS RS
was going to be the central character in
my book but how does one find him this
child lived for 4 months after uh Sydney
Farber injected him with antifolates and
then died afterwards um so um so I began
to put in uh advertisements on list
serves around Boston I thought you know
maybe the parents were alive maybe I
knew I knew the child had a twin who
didn't have leukemia interestingly um
called es so I kept putting out little
ads saying that you know if if you're es
you happen to have a brother who had
leukemia in 1948 please contact me if
you have if you have a parent if you had
a father any connection and there was
nothing there was no response so I got
dejected and I went actually to India
for to my parents house um for um a
vacation and someone told me yella
remember yella the chemist someone told
me y's biographer and friend lived two
or three blocks from my parents house in
India so I said fine since I'm not doing
nothing except writing this book
obsessively every day might as well go
and visit y's biographer so I went to
y's biographer and y's biographer tells
me that we had a long conversation at
the end of the conversation he says well
you know I was at farber's Institute and
I met Dr Farber in 1952 or 53 and while
I was there um I was taking notes and
actually he gave me a roster of all the
patients that he was treating for for
leukemia um and in that roster if if you
look through the roster he he kept
little cuting uh was an article from the
Boston Sunday Herald from 1948
containing the picture of Robert Sandler
um and so that picture is reproduced in
the book it's actually one the first
pictures of the book and in fact the
book is dedicated to Robert Sandler 1945
to 48 and to those who came before and
after him um that's that's a great story
but the story gets even crazier because
last Friday when this event was
announced um I get a phone call from my
publish from my publisher who says you
won't believe it h hang on the line and
it's uh Robert Sandler's mother and his
brother uh and they contacted me uh uh
last Friday and and and she was crying
and um because she had lost obviously
the one of her twins the other twin had
survived and um and she said something
very interesting um I mean I spoke with
her with her with her son so through her
son she said something
interesting um she said uh that uh when
the child had died um it was in their
their faith was not to perform an
autopsy um and Sydney Farber apparently
begged them to perform an autopsy um and
she was really shaken by it and she had
lived she's
88 I think or 89 for 86 years after the
death of her child she had lived with
the guilt of having submitted her
child's body to an autopsy um and she
said to me that um but of course that
autopsy turns out to be very crucial
because it was through autopsies like
that that Farber finally figured out
what the next step was how to how to use
the next drug in the extra mission and
so she said to me this book really
brings that entire story that 87y old
open story to a close because finally at
the end of 87 years she says I can now
put that idea to rest that I had allowed
my my dying child my my dead son to uh
to be opened up for an autopsy so I
thought it was a very moving Testament
to what books can do uh at times um so
um I'm going to now tell you I'm going
to read a little bit from a chapter
called farber's gauntlet um in which I I
describ that case I describ the case and
remember the only thing and this is part
of um you know this is part of the uh
part of learning to write for me was how
do you take a paper which is
about uh two paragraphs two and a half
paragraphs long a case description in
the paper and how do you convert it into
something that comes alive uh that
becomes a story and and and and what
what what tools do you use so that we
now that Robert Sandler becomes a
character not just a RS in a scientific
paper but a real human being and his
family becomes a real human being I'm
going to read read a little bit and then
then I'll do another section and then
we'll stop and take questions I won't go
very long so here he is so it turned out
that um because I knew his name I could
figure out his mother's name um uh
because it turned out that in the
article uh his mother's name was listed
uh from the Boston Sunday Herald so
Helen Sandler's name was was listed in
there you'll find her picture in the
book um for people who have the book
it's in the picture section um in the
second page uh over here I'm going to
just lift it up and show you so that's
that's Helen
Sandler with the two
twins um and she um and so so I knew and
then by because Boston has very good
records of death and because the Boston
Public Library um is a resource provides
a resource Source um and actually has a
phone not a phone directory but a
directory of addresses from
1948 you I could very quickly figure out
and I I could figure out where the child
had lived and then in 15 minutes um I
could go back by the way there's a very
important metaphorical quality in the
story which is that the fact that I
found this child a thousand miles away
or 6,000 miles away from Boston um was
very important to me actually in writing
the book because it reminded me about
the entire process of anything that
happens in the book you're looking in
One Direction inevitably find things
6,000 M away and they get connected up
um so it was very for me it was very
personally inspiring because I kept
saying to myself if I if I can do this
if I can find someone 6,000 miles away
then I can unearth any piece of this
history I mean you know with a little
bit of luck um but so I had figured out
and then by by doing this I figured out
where the child had lived because I
could find his address and by finding
his address I could actually go to the
house and again this was very important
to writing the book every time I was
stuck I would often go so um for
instance in in writing about the trials
the Malmo trials the famous mamography
trials in Sweden which were very
important in the history of mography I
decided that I would go to Malmo um
because again I was stuck and there's no
nothing else to you know there's no
other way to move the book and it was in
Malmo that a woman told began to tell me
what it was like to undergo the first
screening Trials of mamography and if
you didn't go to Malmo you'd never
discover this um another example of this
is um you know there was a there's a
there's a section in the book which
talks about uh the link between smoking
and lung cancer which was really
invisible in the 1950s people didn't
know it no one suspected it um had
become invisible actually and um again
to enliven that um I decided that I
would go to I would go to England where
the link was first discovered really to
the building where the link was being
discovered in the 1950s and the 1940s
and 1950s and it was only by being in
that building you realize what a short
distance that building is phys
physically from the ship building and
the Actuarial industry the insurance
industry of England which is located in
thread needle Street and it turns out
that's not a coincidence it turns out
that the very equations that allow us to
solve statistical um uh relationships
risks um are in fact B borrowed in
epidemiology they're borrowed from the
insurance industry because when a ship
was out to sea the actuaries had to make
an estimate what the likelihood of of
the ship coming back was and fortunes
would be would be lost when the ship
came when the ship didn't come back or
half the cargo sank and so there were
all these assessments of risk being
carried out along thread needle Street
which were which were related to the
fact is how does one manage how does one
estimate risk what is the function of
risk and of course that allows us risk
is what we measured when we measure when
we talk about cancer risk right when we
talk about so another story in which you
know unless you physically travel to a
space you never you would never figure
out what what the what the geography is
or what its interior landscape is but
back to back to Robert Sandler
so he lived in he lived in Dorchester as
it turned out um and so here here is
here is the description that comes out
from a collection of going to the going
to the space looking up the weather
report where they where it existed uh
finding uh little bits and pieces and
interviews all of which then get put in
a big giant grinder and come out as a
story as it were so s miles Southwest of
the Longwood hospitals in Boston the
town of Dorchester is a typical
sprawling New England suburb a triangle
wedged between the suti industrial
settlements to the west and the greay
Green Bays of the Atlantic to its East
in the late 1940s waves of Jewish and
Irish immigrants it happened to be that
uh Sandler's parents were Jewish
immigrants ship Builders iron costers
his father was a ship Builder Railway
Engineers fishermen and Factory workers
settled in Dorchester occupying rows of
brick and clapboard houses that snake
their way up bluhill Avenue Dorchester
reinvented itself as a quintessential
Suburban family town with parks and
playgrounds along the river a golf
course a church and a synagogue on
Sunday afternoons families converged at
Franklin Park to walk through its leafy
Pathways or watch ostriches polar bears
and tigers at its zoo and again this is
drawn from little pieces of news from
Dorchester from the 1930s and 1940s and
newspaper clippings and so forth on
August 16th 1947 that day I knew because
it was in the paper um in a house across
from the zoo the child of a ship working
in the Boston yards fell mysteriously
ill with a low-grade fever that waxed
and waned over two weeks without pattern
followed by an increasing lethargy and
palor Robert Sandler was 2 years old his
twin Elliot was an active cherubic
toddler in perfect health so now we pick
up from farber's paper uh because he
begins to describe this uh because every
paper is a case history so there he is
telling his story in scientific terms
which I'm now translating into into
non-scientific terms 10 days after his
first fever Robert's condition worsened
significantly his temperature climbed
higher his complexion turned from Rosie
to a spec milky white and all of this is
actually inous paper he was brought to
Children's Hospital in Boston his spleen
a fist siiz organ that stores and makes
blood usually barely palpable under the
rib cage was visibly enlarged heaving
down like an overfilled bag a drop of
blood under fiber under farber's
microscope revealed the identity of his
illness thousands of immature lymphoid
leukemic blasts were dividing in a
frenzy their chromosomes condensing and
uncondensed like tiny clenched and
unclenched fists Sandler arrived at
Children's Hospital just a few weeks
after Farber had received his first
package from letterly we knew that
because yela had kept records of when he
sent the packages across to um Sydney
farber's Hospital on September 6th 1947
this is from the paper again Farber
began to inject Sandler with teroy
aspartic acid or paa the first of
letterly antifolates U and there's a
brackets here consent to run a clinical
trial for a drug even a toxic drug was
not required parents were occasionally
cursorily informed about a trial
children were almost never informed or
consulted the nurenberg code for human
experimentation requiring explicit
voluntary consent from patients was
drafted interestingly on August 9th 1947
less than a month from The paa Trial
from farber's trial so Farber is sitting
here the the protocols for human
voluntary consent are being drafted
across the Atlantic uh Farber uh in
Boston had it is it is doubtful that
Farber in Boston had ever heard of such
a required code he would eventually hear
about it of course everyone eventually
hear about it but there was no such
thing uh the drug paa had little effect
over the next month Sandler turned
increasingly lethargic he developed a
limp the result of leukemia pressing
down on his spinal cord joint aches
appeared and then violent migrating
pains then the leukemia burst through
one of his bones in his thigh causing a
fracture and unleashing a blindingly
intense Indescribable Pain by December
the case seemed hopeless the tip of
Sandler spleen more dense than ever with
leukemic cells dropped down to his
pelvis he was withdrawn listless swollen
and pale on the verge of death when
Elliot called me up he said how did you
know about the bone fracture um uh
because he his his only memory from his
childhood he said I have only one memory
we shared a room in Dorchester um with
two adjacent uh carts and they were 3
years old 2 and a half years old he said
much of that is a blur and maybe even
this memory is mythical but he says one
night there was one night when his
brother start was so ill and screaming
so violently that in fact they had
brought in uh EMT what what be EMT in
that day and age to that to their U to
their home to take the brother to
farber's hospital in fact that was the
night probably most likely that was the
night that he had the leukemic fracture
this is a time when leukemia bursts
through your bones and actually causes
what's called a pathological
fracture um on December 28th however
Farber received a new version of the
antifolate from subar and Kil U this one
was called aminopterin a chemical with a
small change uh from the structure of
paa Farber snatched the drug as soon as
it arrived and began to inject the boy
with it hoping at best for a minor
reprieve in his cancer the response was
marked the white cell count which had
been climbing astronomically 10,000 in
September 20,000 in November and nearly
70,000 in December suddenly stopped
rising and hovered at a plateau and then
even more remarkably the counts actually
started to drop the leukemic blasts
gradually flickering out in the blood
and then all but disappearing by New
Year's Eve the count had dropped to
nearly 1 Sixth of its peak value
bottoming out at nearly normal level the
cancer had not vanished under the
microscope there were still malignant
white cells but it had temporarily
abated frozen into hematological
stalemate in the Frozen Boston winter on
January 13 1948 again we pick it up from
farber's paper Sandler returns returned
to the clinic walking on his own for the
first time in two months his spleen and
R liver had shrunk so dramatically that
his clothes Farber noted had become
loose around the abdomen his bleeding
had stopped his appetite turned ravenous
as if he were trying to catch up on six
months of lost meals
by February Farber noted the child's
alertness nutrition and activity were
equal to his twins for a brief month or
so Robert Sandler and Elliot Sandler
seemed identical again so um so that's
the story and that's a little bit about
sort of behind the scenes of what
happens when you when you write a book
like this um I'm going to skip forward
and introduce you to one major other
character um and that is U Mary Lasker
um U and so
farber's emergence from farber's
emergence from the basement laboratory
into the the Limelight of medicine uh is
in some sense was his first experiment
uh but Farber performed actually what I
call his second experiment his second
experiment which I think is actually
just as crucial and just as important um
and this was not an experiment in
science but an experiment in media um
and so he he realized having sent having
invented essentially these chem
therapeutic drugs that he needed to
launch a national platform or at least a
local platform to begin with to attack
cancer um and he began to then look for
collaborators who would allow him to do
this and he found an incredible
collaborator early on and that was a
variety Club of Boston this was a club
of uh essentially Movie
Makers again the postwar Boom in movie
making had begun to pour money into the
coffers of the variety Club these these
men were becoming very wel
and in fact in their past they had
adopted a child um and made children's
causes a big part of their uh part of
their General uh cause this is the
variety club and so Farber thought this
was an ideal Ally because he could then
hook up with the variety club and
thereby launch a local a large local
platform against cancer um and so he was
he then again figuring out the past
figuring out the idea that the variety
Club had had acquired this adopted child
and thereby created an icon Farber began
to look for his own icon a child with
cancer who would carry the message um
and unfortunately when he went upstairs
to his Wards I mean these were children
with leukemia being injected with
antifolates and they were desperately
ill people say they were throwing up
lost their hair barely able to live let
alone be a vast mascot for or icon for
cancer but there was one child who was
not being treated for
leukemia who he found and this child
came from Maine and um had you know had
was being treated for a different cancer
the only problem was his name was AAR
Gustafson um and so so partly to conceal
his name and partly to give him
anonymity but also partly to create a
name that was actually recognizable far
rechristened him Jimmy and so this was
the birth of the Jimmy fund um and
within by using the variety club and by
using actually baseball U which was a
big Boston phenomenon Remains the big
Boston phenomenon uh by using so again
you see farber's mind at work here uh he
is he has he has he has a child that
he's going to create anonymize and be
and make the the icon for cancer but
then he quickly leans in pulls in movies
and then he quickly leans in and he
pulls in actually this the baseball um
Ted Williams most importantly there was
a change uh in the baseball in the
history of baseball and Boston which I
won't go into but but Ted Williams
eventually and then he incorporates all
of this he puts it all into a big mixer
and out comes the Jimmy fund and has be
pops out and within the first few within
the first few months it's generated
enormous amount of money for what it was
um and so this is this is farber's
second experiment and what what is
happening at this time of course is that
Farber is emerging himself from the
basement into public prominence and I
remember the story about Fanny Rosenau
that I told you that mirrors the
emergence of cancer from its basement as
it were to public prominence this exact
period of time and that finally tells us
why I chose Farber I chose Farber
because of this metaphorical parallel
because his journey out from his
basement to the inventions of
chemotherapy and subsequently to the
Jimmy fund and eventually through Mary
Lasker into the into the the public
prominence and the war on cancer is
precisely the journey that cancer itself
makes in a more metaphorical sense from
it's hidden in the basement
disease that couldn't be talked about to
its vast public face today um and that
again by using Sydney farber's story you
could then tell the larger story of of
what was happening to cancer at large um
and at that point of time somewhere we
don't know the exact date actually he
meets um This Woman This magnetic
character from from New York uh Mary
Lasker Mary Lasker uh was described to
me most recently as a woman who had
never heard the word no um she was an
very unusual for her time she had made a
lot of money independently um as an
entrepreneur she figured out actually
just um just after the war she figured
out that actually in in between the wars
and after the war she figured out that
women had to needed to go to work um and
her genius was that she began to create
what was prefab dresses uh pre-cut
prefab dresses so that you wouldn't have
to go to your tailor and Stitch you
could just go you cash and carry and
that was an incredible piece genius and
of course you you can understand how you
know how the history of feminism is
already working its way into the history
of cancer uh through Mary Lasker but
ultimately through many many other
channels so um nonetheless so Mary
Lasker independently wealthy marries
Albert Lasker who is an advertising
executive also very wealthy and Mary
lasar turns begins to turn her attention
onto the war on cancer um and um she she
decides that she's going to use all her
resources her philanthropy she's going
to she's going to take philanthropy to
to an enormous new scale and she's going
to Lobby uh Congress to unleash funds
for the war on cancer and she finds in
Sydney Farber the Ally that she's
looking for I describe it as really the
coming together of two halves of a map
because Farber provides the scientific
legitimacy Mary laska provides the the
urgency and the the philanthropic energy
and these two things come together and
they really launch and then and and the
end uh they begin to really actively
campaign for the war on cancer and I
reproduce uh for people of the book I
reproduce this very famous advertisement
that they launched in 1969 which says Mr
Nixon you can cure cancer um and at the
bottom the signed by alasker and Farber
and various other people and at the
bottom it says um why don't we cure
cancer for its for America's 200th
birthday what a wonderful gift that
would be um and so right from the
adversan you understand what's going on
there's a kind of optimism a kind of
huis this is America that's just put
human beings on the moon um solved the
the atomic bomb um and therefore the
idea that if you pour resources into a
project into into a problem so-called
goal directed or targeted research you
will eventually crack the problem and
cancer uh meanwhile childhood leukemia
has been cured by combination
chemotherapy and so they get a real
boost to this idea that cancer is
basically a puzzle waiting to be solved
and there's a penicillin waiting
somewhere um and then from there on the
rest of the book goes on to describe how
that picture gets more and more
complicated and advances are made but
that that moment of hubris still haunts
oncology over and over again we keep
keep coming back to it to some extent um
and one of the things of course we
realize that there is never that there's
no one solution this idea of a
penicillin for cancer breaks down and we
begin to understand cancer as a much
more complex entity not as one disease
but as a family of disease
and and we enter that new era finally in
the last sort of last section of the
book which I will not give away I'm
going to do one more reading and then
I'm going to stop and take questions and
this is from the very last chapter in
the book
um and uh Nan my editor said to me you
know it is a golden rule of writing that
you never introduce a new character in
the last chapter of your book and she
said well okay but for you one time we
make an
exception so it turns out that there is
a new character but it's a patient and
um you know sometimes you write books
and you break some rules and that's fine
um so so this is a woman who I met
actually at the Dan of Farber across the
across town I was treating her um she
had a very aggressive variant of uh
saroma stomach cancer and had an
incredible response to a New Drug a
molecularly targeted drug a striking
response and then she relapsed uh um and
then she came to Boston around a second
relapse to try another experimental drug
to see if she could get a third relapse
um so this is a real fighter um and a
woman whose life had been extended by
about six or five or six years um during
during this period by a novel
experimental drug but now had relapsed
the third time and was no longer
treatable she was actually fine she had
finished her treatment um when I recall
that final conversation with Germaine
embarrassingly enough the objects seemed
to stand out more vividly than the words
a hospital room with its sharp smell of
dis of disinfectant and hand soap the
Steely overhead light a wooden side
table on Wheels piled with pills books
newspaper clippings jewelry and
postcards her room wallpapered with
flowers wallpaper with pictures of her
beautiful house in Montgomery and of her
daughter a standard issue plastic
Hospital picture filled with a bunch of
sunflowers perched on a table by her
side Germaine as I remember her was
sitting by the the bed one leg dangling
casually down wearing her usual
eccentric and arresting combination of
clothes and some large and unusual
pieces of jewelry her hair was carefully
arranged she looked formal Frozen and
perfect like a photograph of someone in
the hospital waiting to die she seemed
content she laughed and she joked she
made a nasogastric tube she made wearing
a nasogastric tube seem effortless and
somehow
dignified only years later in writing
this book could I finally put into words
why that meeting left me so
uneasy why the gestures in that room
seemed Larger than Life why the objects
seemed like symbols why Germaine herself
seemed like an actor playing a part
nothing I realized was incidental the
characteristics of Germaine's
personality that had once seemed
spontaneous and impulsive were in fact
calculated and almost reflexes reflexive
responses to her illness her clothes
were loose and Vivid because they were
decoys against the growing outline of
the tumor in her abdomen her necklace
was distractingly large so as to pull
attention away from her
cancer her room was Topsy Turvy with
bobles and pictures the hospital pitcher
filled with flowers the card stacked to
the wall because without them it would
devolve into the anonymity of any other
room in any other hospital she had
dangled her leg at that precise posed
angle because the tumor had invaded her
spine and begun to paralyze her other
leg making it impossible for her to sit
any other way her casualness was studied
her jokes were
rehearsed her had tried to humiliate her
it had made her Anonymous and seemingly
humorless it had sentenced her to die an
unsightly death in a freezing hospital
room thousands of miles away from home
she came from the south she had
responded with a Vengeance moving to be
always one step ahead trying to outwit
it it was like watching someone locked
in a chess game every time Germaine's
disease moved imposing yet another
terrifying constraint on her she made an
equally assertive move in return the
illness acted she reacted it was a
morbid hypnotic game again game that had
taken over her life she dodged one blow
only to be caught by the other and she
too was like Carol's Red Queen stuck
pedaling furiously just to keep still in
one
place Germaine seemed that evening to
have captured something essential about
our struggle against cancer that to keep
Pace with this malady you need to keep
inventing and Reinventing learning and
unlearning
strategies Germaine fought cancer
obsessively cany desperately fiercely
madly brilliantly zealously as if
channeling all the fierce inventive
energy of generations of men and women
who had fought cancer in their past and
would fight it in the future her quest
for a cure had taken her on a strange
and Limitless journey through internet
blogs and teaching hospitals
chemotherapy and clinical trials halfway
across the country through a landscape
more desolate desperate and disquieting
than she had ever
imagined she had deployed every last
morsel of energy to the quest mobilizing
and remobilizing the dregs of her
courage summoning her will and wit and
Imagination until that final evening she
had stared into the Vault of her
resourcefulness and found it empty in
that last night hanging on to her life
by no more than a tenuous thread
summoning all her strength and dignity
as she wheeled herself to the privacy of
her bathroom it was as if she had
encapsulated the essence of a 4,000 year
old war and that's the end of the
book Thank you for
coming so Dana was uh an important
person he was a he was a fun he was a f
he was a funer he he was Charles Dana um
and very important in the history of
Boston it was hard to put every
character as you can imagine so that's
why I didn't put him so that's the Dana
part of the Dana farbor but an important
character in the history of the Dana
farbor yeah I mean this is a very
important question because of course um
it was Susan sonag among others who
first pointed out that there was a
punitive quality of a battle metaphor um
if you if you if you visualize yourself
as a battle in a battle against cancer
and you lose that battle then you become
a loser um and therefore all the
punitive qualities of that then become
burdens for you my general feeling
is Susan is a very important mentor to
this book an invisible Mentor an
important Mentor however um my feeling
is in some ways I I wrote the book both
as homage but also challenge to Susan
because I feel as if cancer and and this
is unusual when you read her book too I
feel as if cancer is a disease replete
in metaphors and getting away from
metaphor I mean the word cancer comes
from crab it's a metaphorical word um
and it's because as we point out in the
book it's because hypocrates thought
that a tumor was a crab buried under the
skin and the blood vessels around it
were the legs of the crab um so right
from every piece of language we use
around this is a is a is metaphorical
language um and so there is a sense in
which resisting that metaphor becomes
itself a a battle um and for and I'll
tell you what my personal thoughts about
this are my personal thoughts are for
some patients a battle metaphor is
crucial for other patients it's punitive
and I say if it works for you and if if
if that's what if that's what what's
needed for for your resilience to be uh
to to come out then use it um and if
it's not then don't use it there is no
archetypal battle there is no archetypal
metaphor and yet much like there's no
archetypal cancer and there's no
archetypal patient everyone's
relationship to the disease is vastly
different and one way we I think we can
Empower ourselves and our patients is to
not tell them what metaphors to use but
to allow them to invent their own and
and and there are plenty to be invented
so that's my long answer to your
question so um we are um we work in a
team uh I see patients half a day a week
um I run a laboratory which focuses on
leukemia um and my small story about
that is so what happens is that for uh
so I have a colleague we we split our
patients um but just to give you just to
give you a a sense of what what the book
tour is like um I was on call through
Thanksgiving um and um I have always
chosen Thanksgiving to be my call time
because I was not born in this country
um so it felt as if it felt as if number
one uh everyone else had to do something
so I might as well be in the hospital um
and now it's become very different of
course now I have a family um and you
know I'm part of the fabric of this
country and so but but I kept it up as a
sort of tradition myself because it's my
own way of dealing with Thanksgiving I'm
happy to do it so I landed on the plane
from
Toronto um and the reason it was in
Canada was because they don't have
Thanksgiving at the same time so I land
on the plane in Toronto and I was
immediately on call so so so I think
what's nice about doing that is that it
keeps your perspective you think you've
written a good book but there are people
who have much deeper questions and
issues in the hospital so it was very
good reminder to be
humble I think uh as far as day-to-day
work in patients you know I talked a
little bit about this earlier I referred
to a little bit about this earlier I
think the understanding The Narrative
quality of
medicine was very crucial um and it and
it if if the one thing that this Brook
reminded me uh over and over again was
that if we lose the narrative quality of
medicine then something will be terribly
lost um and and we need to restore it
and there are dozens of ways to restore
it one of them is by writing the other
way you know there are programs in
narrative medicine that ow you to do
this um I I heard this statistic some of
some of you might have heard this um
number um uh this was a great and
important study um when uh they recorded
when when uh scientists or researchers
recorded uh patients giving their their
stories to doctors and estimated the
amount of time when the doctor first
interrupts the patient so how many how
many seconds or
minutes occurs between the time you
start saying you what's happening what's
your story why are you here from that
point of time to the first time that a
patient is interrupted I anyone have a
guess yeah so it's 18 seconds uh so the
number was 18 seconds um it has
increased somewhat after that study
because so
embarrassing so but I think I think the
newest numbers are like 21 seconds or 30
that's barely a sentence um so um and
you know I'm not saying that anyone and
I'm sure if you're if you're in medicine
you know that no one is above it we all
interrupt that is that is part of you
know what part of the profession
involves uh cutting people short because
of a variety of reasons U but
nonetheless um but it's a reminder uh
for me to um to do to to resist that
Force um and it's a reminder that again
going back to the the the thought that I
had earlier the shamanic aspects of
Medicine
um cannot be replaced even even if we
invent the most incredible pieces of
Technology we will we will be un I can
guarantee you that we will be unable to
replace the shamanic aspects of medicine
and they are so stitched into our
anthropological Consciousness that
replacing them will really mean the
death of human beings um so anyway I
think it's both um because in fact one
of the things that we forget to remember
one of the things that we forget is that
that patients also expect a story back
from you um and that's very crucial um
so much as listening to a story is
important reconstructing your own story
of an illness is as important in fact
that is what um that is what uh doc that
is what one of the practices of medicine
is so in in in a very abstracted sense
you might imagine that the practice of
medicine is a transaction of stories in
which you tell me a story and say this
and this happened to me and then I tell
you well my here here is my return story
to you which explains some of this
history um and both of them uh are not
only narrative but there there series of
hypotheses strung together right so
there I'm saying to you the way that I
view what you just told me is the
following you know you might come to me
and say well in fact I've had you know
I've had a rash for 15 days and I don't
know what happened etc etc I was been
traveling here or came back at and and
did something and I tell you back a
story saying I think
that in fact the rash is because you've
changed your detergent um or I think
you're having a rash because you
traveled to a foreign country and got
exposed to this bacteria that you don't
can't even see right now but if we did
the following blood test we may be able
to pick it up so I think I think there's
a transactional quality about these
these storytelling um and they happen
all the time in medicine I think that's
what's happening people are constantly
exchanging stories uh yeah I mean there
were you know one thing that I that that
that's important in the book is that
Sydney for Mar lask are complicated
characters the idea of pushing money
onto a problem throwing money into a
problem not necessarily uh didn't
necessarily work and yet without Sydney
Farber and Mary Lasker we wouldn't be
where we are today so that complexity
conveying that complexity is itself uh
one of the one of the major efforts in
the book I hope we do I mean the
question of money is often brought up I
just want to give you a couple of
numbers that you might want want want to
think about um the National Cancer
budget uh for this year is about $5
billion um let's multiply that by 10 U
because um you know let's multiply 10
because you know there are clinical
trials going on hospitals etc etc so you
come to $50 billion um we just spent
,000 billion on this war um so uh by
whatever account either that's 20 fold
or 200 fold uh the number of men and
women who will die of cancer in America
is 600,000 this year um so it will
affect one and four of us one and three
of us depending on how you cut the
statistics so I'm not going to belabor
the point that people often say well
aren't we pouring enough be pouring
money into cancer research let's keep
that into perspective I I agree we are
and I think there needs to be
streamlining of resources absolutely
every discipline needs streamlining of
resources um but before we lose
perspective those are what the real
numbers suggest to us um I'm actually no
longer at the Farber so um but in
institutes around the nation
um particularly large Comprehensive
Cancer Centers there has been has been
an an attempt to create integrative
medicine programs um a strong attempt um
but that said I would the one thing I I
I one thing I do feel very strongly
about is um it's very important that
every time we integrate new forms of
medicine uh we're talking about
metaphors they can become punitive so
here's one that's very very very common
you aren't you aren't responding well to
chemotherapy because you're
stressed right or or or even more
acutely in the 1940s and 1950s uh you
have cancer because you're overstressed
this was actually the reason that people
said you had people had gastric cancer
right so so I always I I would make a
plea to people with who practice
integrative medicine and and and other
forms of medicine incling surgeons and
chemotherapist let's not let's not
invite another punitive metaphor for
disease that's already burdened with
metaphors I think it's a wonderful thing
to have integrative medicine but if the
implication of Integrative Medicine is
you know that we're going to now tell
patients that unless you go to the
acupuncturist you know you're not going
to get relieved of the stress that is
burdening you and un you know making you
unable to get Che chemotherapy or get
your surgery um I think that's a very
complicated story so that's my plea to
people who practice integrated
medicine well I mean you know
ask um that's a question I think that's
sort of beyond the book uh I one thought
that I have have about it is that um the
one of the most chilling realizations of
cancer biology which emerged in the
1970s was that the genes that allow
embryos to grow and our hands to grow
and our brains to grow if you mutate and
distort those genes if you activate them
or inactivate them you get cancer um so
in other words you take you take the
genes and this was a very very pivotal
realization of the 1970s um in in before
that we had fantastically hoped or
imagined that cancer would only be
something exogenous something coming
from outside like a virus for instance
um the fact that it's not that in fact
it emerges from that's stitched into the
human chromosome and it emerges only out
of these very genes of course I'm not
saying that I mean carcinogens activate
these genes so there is of course a
relationship with the environment with
the outside but there's also the outside
impinging on the inside as it were um
and so when you asked the question about
purpose the only thing I can say is that
these genes have very vital functions in
normal biology and therefore are have
have a peculiar Poise between performing
these vital functions and when they get
distorted becoming cancerous I don't
know if that's a purpose or not but it
certainly tells you why these genes even
exist why cancer is part of our bodies
part of our societies part of
ourselves thank you
[Applause]